[Music]
Jeanne beret the first woman to travel
around the world by ship compress a
feature but it's especially noteworthy
when you consider the fact that she did
it during a time when women weren't
allowed to sail on epic expeditions you
might wonder how she managed to pull
this stunt off well let's start from the
beginning
Jean beret was born in 1740 to a young
family in Burgundy France
her father was illiterate which was
nothing out of the norm for a peasant at
that time but surprisingly young Jean
was lucky enough to get some form of
basic education at least she could read
and write not too much is known of
berets early years but the theory is
that her mother who was one of the rare
literate peasants taught her daughter
anyway
fast forward a few years and Jean now in
her 20s and having already lost both
parents was looking for a much-needed
source of income little did she know
that the job she'd land would have her
travelling the world falling in love and
making a name for herself in history but
not yet
enter French naturalist Philibert
commerson the then 35 year old with the
son of a civil officer studied medicine
and even worked as a doctor for a bit
before exploring the natural world he'd
already started making a name for
himself in the scientific community even
working with the likes of the famous
botanist Carl Linnaeus also known as the
father of modern taxonomy that is the
science of classifying and naming newly
discovered species but I digress
commerce ins wife tragically passed away
in 1762
and he himself wasn't in good health
this is where 22 year old Jean Marais
entered his life Philibert employed Jean
as his housekeeper and personal nurse of
course we can't know exactly when the
two fell in love but by 1764 it was
pretty much a fact
the two moved to Paris well beret
continued to take care of commerson and
the household duties the following year
in 1765 commerce um was invited to join
the famous French explorer Louie Antoine
de Bougainville expedition around the
world he would work as a botanist
studying wildlife and plants across the
globe at first comer some was hesitant
about accepting the offer and joining
the expedition he certainly had a great
love for discovering new plant and
animal species but he was still in bad
health well once he was told that he
could bring an assistant with him he was
a little more open to the idea but it
couldn't be his lovely Jean like I said
earlier this was the 18th century and
women were not allowed on board
scientific expeditions by sea not
wanting to leave cumbersome under the
care of someone other than herself she
came up with the idea to disguise
herself as a male assistant her plan
work and her disguise must have been
pretty good because she boarded the ship
as a man named Jean beret not even
commerson recognized her at first so he
treated her like the stranger he thought
she was
since the botanist had tons of equipment
he and his assistant Jean were given a
nice big cabin just for themselves on
one of the two ships this turned out to
be convenient for beret because it gave
her a lot more privacy than she would
have had otherwise she even had her own
private bathroom seems as though all the
odds were in her favor during the voyage
commerce ins legs started giving him
problems with a recurring ulcer he also
had a bad case of seasickness so beret
spent most of her time taking care of
him in commerce ins memoirs he explained
that the botanist didn't have much to do
during the first part of the expedition
they only got busy when the ships
reached Montevideo the capital of
Uruguay over in the new world then the
bulk of the scientific work would begin
he'd need to study the terrain the Seas
and the life that inhabited
down he'd eventually discover a new
dolphin species that would be named in
his honor
come ursins dolphin at this time his leg
was in really bad shape but it turned
out that beret wasn't just a peasant
girl only good for helping take care of
her partner she'd ended up taking on a
major role in this expedition that is
she made a great naturalist herself with
commerson slake keeping him pretty much
in mobile marae did a lot of the actual
labour herself through rain wind snow
and mountains she carried all the
specimens that they found as well as the
supplies they were using when they reach
Brazil commerson couldn't even leave the
ship at all and had to wait for his leg
to heal while he was stuck on board his
assistant went around collecting more
specimens she even found the beautiful
flowering vine which commerson dubbed
bougainvillea in honor of the
expedition's famous leader when the ship
reached Montevideo for the second time
they were to collect plant specimens in
Patagonia while the ship's waited for
the winds to carry them through the
strait of magellan even though his leg
was still causing him a lot of pain
commerson decided to leave the ship and
try to get some work done
béret accompanied him all the way
helping him collect specimens shells and
stones this was an extremely difficult
mission and they quickly earned a
reputation of having strength and
courage this got them the respect of
Bougainville himself as well as all the
other explorers in the weeks that came
Bure even helped cover some catalog the
notes they took and the specimens they
collected in April 1768 when the
expedition reached Tahiti Berets true
identity was finally revealed one story
goes that it was the native Tahitians
who immediately figured out that she was
a woman but even suspicions had been
growing on the ship before that
Bougainville later wrote that the other
explorers and crewmembers had started
questioning John's figure lack of facial
hair voice and particularly privacy so
another account has the ship's surgeon
identifying the botanist assistant as a
female well whichever way it went down
the Kent was now out of the bag beret
and cumbersome immediately both denied
the latter's knowledge that his
assistant was a woman but it didn't
matter she still needed to go the ship
then set sail for Isle de France which
is present-day Mauritius a small island
country east of Madagascar commerson and
beret were left there as Bougainville
had respect for the two and didn't want
to go back to France with a woman on
board his ship remember that would have
been illegal so this way he was rid of
the problem and he wouldn't have to
punish his friends as luck would have it
commerson found out that the governor of
the island was a fellow botanist and
acquaintance so he and beret settled
down nicely and continued to their work
they traveled together and collected
plant specimens on the nearby Reunion
Island and Madagascar but tragedy struck
when commerson passed away in 1773 due
to poor health Jean was left alone
without any finances or friends the
governor had since been sent back to
France so he couldn't help her out with
work she was left to fend for herself so
she found a job in the Mauritian capital
city of Port Louis managing it in its
probably there where she met Jean de
Bernay an officer in the French army who
was probably unroot to France when he
arrived on the island beret and uber
name must have hit it off because they
soon fell in love and got married the
following year in 1774
the happy newlyweds then moved back to
France which finally completed jean
berets circumnavigation of the globe she
was the first woman in history to
complete such an expedition in 1776
Mireille received the money that
commerson had left her in his will
although the sum was enough to allow
beret and Dubonnet to settle down in the
village of Santo lay Jean still didn't
get the recognition she deserved for her
irreplaceable role in the Bougainville
expedition but in 1785 the now 45 year
old did start getting a modest pension
for her contribution to botany although
there were many plant and animal species
named after commerson jean beret never
got such an honor during her lifetime
it wasn't until 2012 when a newly
discovered flower species was dedicated
to the great female Explorer it was
dubbed solanum barrett a from a peasant
girl to a history-making world explorer
the story of jean beret is a fascinating
one and one certainly worth remembering
it just goes to show you that seemingly
ordinary people can end up having
extraordinary lives so do you know any
more interesting stories like the one of
Jean Perret let me know down in the
comments if you learned something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend but hey don't go
sailing around the world just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life